---
title: "Armando's \"Only in New York\" for visitors"
categories: ["Travel"]
---

So you're visiting my home city...you can go to the touristy stuff, or you can see some things that make New York unique among all US cities---architecturally, historically and culturally.

# Logistics hints for first time visitors

* Trying to get around and find stuff on your first visit can be
overwhelming, so have some kind of plan of what things you want to do
each day, and try to cluster things that are geographically near each other.

*   *Don't even think of renting a car or driving in Manhattan.* 
You'll spend most of your time sitting in traffic or cursing, and most
of your money on parking fees.  Taxis are easy to find but often no
faster than walking if traffic is heavy.

* The subway runs 24x7.  You can purchase and load up a MetroCard at
any station; individual rides are around $3 flat fare but there are
also multi-day unlimited-use cards.  The card is also valid on buses.

# 0. The Usual Suspects

These are all classic tourist attractions and well worth seeing, but
they're obvious choices and well covered by other guides, so  I won't
discuss them further: the Empire State Building, the Metropolitan
Museum of Art, the Museum  of Natural History (though it does have an
exceptional dinosaur exhibit recently renamed the "Hall of Birds and
their Extinct Ancestors") and the very kid-friendly and well-done Rose
Center for Earth and Space (a/k/a Planetarium) adjacent to it, the
Museum of Modern Art, South Street Seaport, Central Park (about the
same size as Golden Gate Park in SF). 

For a panoramic view, [The Edge NYC](edgenyc.com) now competes with
the Empire State Building and Freedom Tower (World Trade Center).  All
are expensive but you're not here to save money, and the views are amazing.

# 1. See a Broadway Show

***Why***: Experience not only the best production values in the US, but the energy that pervades one of only two really vigorous theater districts in the world (London is the other), with dozens of shows at dozens of theaters playing on any given night.  Most shows are dark on Mondays; some have Sunday evening shows, others only Sunday matinees.

[BroadwayBox.com](http://broadwaybox.com/) and
[TodayTix](todaytix.com) have 25-50% discounts on
advance tickets for many performances.  (Full price is typically
$90-$125)  Half price tickets for same day (or the day before, for Sunday
matinees) are sold at two "TKTS booths".  The one in Times Square (officially
Duffy Square, 47th and Broadway) is well-known and crowded: Tickets go
on sale at 3pm for the evening shows (11am on matinee days for the matinee show) but people
line up long before then.  The lesser known one is near South Street
Seaport (subway: Fulton St/Broadway/Nassau, 
walk straight east along Fulton St and turn right on Front
St).  It opens at 11am and is frequented by Wall Street workers during
lunch hour.  Its selection is slightly less than the Duffy Square
booth but it's less crowded, and it's easy to combine a trip to this
with a visit to South Street Seaport or to lower Manhattan, to/from
which you can walk along the waterfront. 

**Note**: I'm happy to serve as a recommender/consultant on what to see if you tell me your tastes, so that you don't end up seeing some of the dreck that passes for theater these days.

**Dining and drinking in the theater district: **For a pricey drink with a great view before or after the show, go to the View Lounge in the Marriott Marquis hotel in Times Square (it can get crowded before a show).  For a quieter drink and full dinner menu, the hard-to-find Bar Centrale on 46th St. is great, but reservations a must for dinner.  If you don't mind if it gets a bit loud, Havana Central on 47th St. near Broadway has live Latin music many nights, and great Cuban food.

# **2. Take a boat ride**

***Why:*** The best views of the Statue of Liberty and the lower Manhattan skyline, all for free.  (But no need to do this if you're visiting Ellis Island; see below.)

The Staten Island Ferry (subway: South Ferry, 1; Whitehall St, N,R; Bowling Green, 4,5) is still free and runs every 15-30 minutes all day long.  You will get an awesome view of Miss Liberty (secure a place along the starboard railing early) on the way out, and a stunning view of the lower Manhattan skyline (especially at twilight/night) on the way  back.  Allow an hour for the roundtrip, including waiting times.

Combine with a walk around lower Manhattan, including Battery Park and
the new Freedom Tower and 9/11 Memorial (see below).

# 3. Walk the Brooklyn Bridge

***Why***: one of the great engineering achievements of pre-WWI America, its towers were the tallest structures in America when completed in 1887.  Culturally, it knitted the area together just as the Bay Bridge knitted the East Bay and San Francisco together.

The pedestrian walkway is on the UPPER level and away from all the
cars, affording a spectacular view all around.  **Caution**: the
walkway has a striped-off bike lane that is VERY heavily used.  Stay
out of cyclists' way.  My favorite route is to take the subway to High
St in Brooklyn (A,C), follow the signs/people to walk 2 blocks to the
bridge access stairway, and then walk across the bridge into
Manhattan, where you'll end up at City Hall.  Including the subway
ride from lower Manhattan, allow about an hour.  

# 4. Experience Immigrant New York

***Why***: The story of New York, and America, is the story of
immigrants.  Every immigration story, and every immigrant-related
issue we deal with today, happened here first.  Here are two sites
that tell the story vividly. 

The little-known [Tenement Museum](http://www.tenement.org/) on the
Lower East Side takes you on a guided tour through one of the very few
remaining tenement buildings in New York (preserved by designation as
an historical building). The house has period furniture and fittings,
and much of the finishing (paint, wainscotting, etc.) is
original.  The tours bring to life the background and lifestyles of
the different immigrant groups that came in waves through the Lower
East Side.  *Tours are about 90 minutes, have limited capacity and are
required for entry, and reservations are a must.*   While you're in
the neighborhood, have an overstuffed pastrami sandwich at the famous
[Katz's Deli](katzsdelicatessen.com) on Houston St near Essex St
(subway: F to 2nd Ave, or M to Delancey St).  The [New York Adventure
Club](adventureclub.com) offers periodic "ethnic food tours" of the
Lower East Side.

[Ellis Island](http://www.ellisisland.org/) (now a National Park)
served as the gateway into New York for over 12 million immigrants,
and is now an immigration museum.  Because it includes actual
artifacts, voice interviews, etc. with people who came through Ellis
Island, it's particularly moving, and you can recreate the experience
immigrants would have had as they first stepped off the boat.  There's
also facilities for looking up your own forbears who may have
immigrated through Ellis.  The views from the boat ride to Ellis are
comparable to those of the Staten Island Ferry, so no need to do
both.  Allow 1/2 day. 

Note: the same ferry that serves Ellis Island also stops at the Statue
of Liberty.  You can enter the Statue's pedestal for free (as I
recall) but have to pay to climb up to the crown.  It is a strenuous
climb and in summer it's like climbing in a copper oven.  You get a
beautiful view of the statue from the Staten Island Ferry, and better
views of Manhattan from the top of the Empire State Building, so I'd
skip this. 

# 5.  See Grand Central Terminal

***Why: **[GCT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand_Central_Terminal) is
one of the few Beaux Arts railroad terminals in the US that still
serves as an active railroad terminal (45 tracks with 30 more planned
for 2015, 286 daily commuter trains, 4 subway lines), and uniquely
captures what the golden age of rail travel must have been
like.  Allow 30 minutes, and it's a good meal stop.  Subway: 4,5,6,7
to 42 St./Grand Central, or S (shuttle) from Times Square.* 

Pre-WWI American architecture, especially Beaux Arts, was buoyed by a
civic optimism that justified creating grand public structures, on a
scale not seen before or since.  (Other excellent examples of grand
civic architecture are the New York Public Library main building, the
Museum of Natural History, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art.)  It is
worth stepping inside GCT just to realize that there was a time when
taking a journey made you feel like you were an important person going
on an important trip, rather than a potential terrorist to be patted
down and then stuffed with bland fast food in a sterile waiting
lounge.  The food court on the lower concourse of GCT is quite good;
I've never eaten at the famous Oyster Bar, which is featured in the
opening credits of Saturday Night Live. 

For logistical reasons, most long-distance trains
in and out of New York use Penn Station---formerly an even grander
terminal than GCT, but reprehensibly destroyed in the 1960s to make
room for the unforgivably ugly Madison Square Garden arena.  Until
2020, the
station itself was relegated to a labyrinthine warren of underground
tunnels.  In 2020 that changed with the opening of Moynihan Train
Hall, created by repurposing the Farley Post Office across the street
from MSG, which had been built shortly after Penn in the same style by
the same architectural firm.  The Post Office courtyard was glassed
in, creating a triumphant train hall that is once again a much more appropriate
arrival into the greatest city in the world.

**Bonus feature: **one of the best places to enjoy a classy, leisurely
cocktail is the [Campbell
Apartment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Campbell_Apartment), former
office/study of New York Central Board member John Campbell.  It's
physically part of GCT but the entrance is around the outside of the
building, facing Vanderbilt Ave.  No sneakers, shorts, or t-shirts. 

# 6.  The New York Public Library

***Why:*** Another amazing Beaux Arts structure from back when the zeitgeist was that a grand public experiment deserved grand public structures.

Just down the street from Grand Central, the main (research,
noncirculating) branch of the NYPL, built on the site of the former
Croton Reservoir, is a spectacular building housing the NYPL's
research collections and both permanent and rotating exhibits of
historical books, maps and literary artifacts.  Admission is free;
allow 30 minutes to wander around.  Walk from Grand Central, or
subway: B,D,F to 42 St./Bryant Park, 7 to Fifth Ave. 

# 7.  Transit Museum

***Why:*** Step into real subway cars from 1904, the year America's largest transit system opened for business, and from every decade since then.

Maybe it's just because I'm a transportation geek but this place is
fascinating.  Built around a decommissioned subway station, a
highlight of the exhibits is a collection of around a dozen subway
cars covering the areas from 1904 to the recent past.  Many of these
are still railworthy and are run as regular trains around the holiday
season for railfans, and most still have period advertisements posted
inside.  The museum itself is [a few blocks from downtown
Brooklyn](http://mta.info/mta/museum). 

# 8. Visit the Steinway factory

Considered by many (including me) to be the makers of the best pianos
anywhere, Steinway & Sons was founded by German immigrant Heinrich
Steinweg (later Henry Steinway) in New York in 1853, and has been
building pianos at the Astoria factory since 1880.  Free factory tours
are held two or three times a week but you must reserve in advance. Every Steinway sold
in the US is made here, essentially by hand and taking about a year
per piano, using largely the same techniques and equipment that were
used in 1880.  (Steinways sold in Europe are made in the Hamburg
factory, which was established later.)  The Steinway factory is about
a 15-20 minute walk 
from the Ditmars Blvd. subway station (N, Q lines).  Allow 2 hours for
tour itself, exclusive of travel time.

# 9.  Greenwich Village

Funky food, great bars, varied music scene, home of New York's
"freeway revolt", site of the "Stonewall Riots" that launched the gay
rights movement, home of NYU, it combines the cultural role of SF's
North Beach with the closest New York ever got to bohemia.  The
hole-in-the-wall restaurants along Bleecker and especially Macdougal
are generally good bets.  The West Village is the nucleus of the gay
community.  If you're a jazz fan, there are numerous little clubs
everywhere, as well as the world famous Village Vanguard (7th Ave
South and Christopher Street) and the Blue
Note (W 4th St at 6th Ave; subway: A,C,E to W 4 St, 6 to Bleecker St., N, Q, R to
W. 8th St., 1 to Christopher St./Sheridan Square).

# 10.  Lower Manhattan including Ground Zero and 9/11 Memorial

Lower Manhattan (basically, below 14th St.) is the original
New York, and its twisty streets and tucked-away taverns preserve the
feel of post-New-Amsterdam.  Join the Wall Street crowd for an
after-work drink at the Stone Street alley near Coenties Slip, or
drink where George Washington drank at Fraunces Tavern.  Subway: you
can't swing a dead cat in lower Manhattan without having it fall into
a subway station.  Walk in a random direction and you'll soon bump
into a station. 

The [9/11 Memorial and Museum](911memorial.org) is an apolitical, sensitively-done
tribute to those who perished on 9/11/2001.  Admission is free but you
may have to sign up in advance to get in on crowded days.
 
