---
title: "Sognefjord travel itinerary, 2025"
categories: ["Travel"]
---

# Visiting the fjords of Norway? Use this itinerary.

My partner and I carefully worked out the below itinerary for visiting
the Sognefjord, Norway's largest and arguably most famous fjord.  If
you don't want to travel on a package, we suggest you follow this
itinerary, especially if want to avoid renting a car (although the
itinerary is probably useful even if you do rent a car).  While buying
all the tickets described below is easy, navigating the process itself
(which company travels where, etc.) is remarkably tricky, so we hope
this saves you some time.  You're welcome.

# Caveats

* The thing that surprised us most was the scale of the fjords.
Looking at a [map](https://maps.app.goo.gl/M8anQzoEcwQGftFr5), there's various small towns and cities scattered
along the Sognefjord: Flåm, Aurland, Vik, Balestrand... We initially
assumed that (a) these were reasonably close together, so (e.g.) a day
trip to visit one from another would be feasible, and (b) there would
be a reasonably developed ferry network connecting them (since we
didn't have a rental car) with regular departures.  Neither of these
turned out to be true.  The fjords are huge, and the cities are far
apart in terms of travel time on a ferry and even farther if driving,
since the roads must respect mountain geography.  And there is no
ferry "network" but rather a handful of private companies operating
ferry services whose schedules are scattered across several websites
and often out-of-date or hard to read.

* You can do this without a car, and with one or two exceptions in our
list of things to do, having a car actually doesn't help much.  But if
you do have a car, be aware there are limited places in the actual
fjord area to rent a car, and if you rent one in a major city (Oslo or
Bergen) and drive to the Sognefjord, you'll forgo the beautiful train
ride or ferry ride (or both) connecting it to those places.

* Nearly all Norwegian websites have English-language pages, but most
sites do not correctly auto-detect your browser's locale setting to
default to those pages.  If there is no obvious link to display the
English page, try appending '/en' to the root URL, as in
'https://vy.no/en'.

* Norway is ruinously expensive, and the Sognefjord area even more so.
Be prepared for some sticker shock.

# Our suggested itinerary, in a nutshell

* Day 1: travel from Oslo to the Sognefjord area by train, a
spectacular 5-hour ride.

* Days 2-4: activities in the Sognefjord area; we recommend a floating
sauna, a couple of great hikes, a "fjord safari", and seeing a
historic (c. 1180 AD) stave church.

* Day 5: travel from the Sognefjord area to Bergen via a spectacular
5-hour ferry ride.

# Day 1: Oslo to Sognefjord

On the [Norwegian train system website](https://vy.no), book a ticket
from Oslo to Flåm.  This will require a stopover in Myrdal, where
you'll change from the main Oslo-Bergen line to the famous Flåmsbana,
or Flåm railway, a steep mountain railway that takes you down to the
fjord area.

**Advice:** These trains are not very high capacity, and book up far
in advance in high season (summer), so book well ahead.  There are
several departures delay, but we suggest departing in the morning and
choosing a departure that minimizes the connection time in Myrdal,
since there's literally nothing there besides the train station.

**Advice:** Aim to arrive in Flåm around 16:00, as there is a wave of
buses departing between then and around 19:00 to take you to Aurland
(see below).

# Where to stay?

The train drops you off in Flåm, a collection of touristy businesses
(all owned by NorwaysBest.com) that isn't worth spending much time at.
(However, the small railway museum focused on the construction of the
railway itself is worth a 30-45 minute visit.)
We stayed in Aurland, about 10km away, and loved it.  Amazingly,
there's no municipal transportation connecting to it, but there are
private buses operated by NorwaysBest and other operators.

There is not much hotel/hostel capacity in Aurland, and in high season
it books up well in advance.  We stayed at the Winjum Hostel
Stegastein (we found it on booking.com, but they also list on other
sites); they have "rustic" cabins for small groups, bunk-bed dorm 
rooms, and private "family" dorm rooms, all with shared bathroom and
kitchen arrangement (no ensuite bathrooms). They are inexpensive for
the area. The disadvantage is they
are about a 15-minute walk (partly uphill) from the village center of
Aurland where the bus stop and all commerce are located.  The walk is
easy, but if you have luggage it's a bit of a pain; the hostel has its
own private shuttle service you can book in advance for this, to pick
you up directly from Flåm.

Alternatively, there's a couple of hotels in Aurland which are
probably more expensive than where we stayed but also more centrally
located.

# Aurland

Aurland is the capital of the Aurlandsvangen region and the largest
city, which is amusing once you're there.  It has a very well stocked
supermarket, about 3 restaurants, and a couple of hotels, all of which
are located right around the town center where the bus stop is.
(There's only one bus stop for the whole town, so the buses to/from
Flåm, the regional buses mentioned below, etc. all stop there.)

## Floating sauna

The [floating sauna in Aurland](https://www.fjordsauna.com/) is
awesome.  We booked a 90-minute shared session.  Alternating between
sitting in the sauna and jumping into the fjord for a cold-plunge felt
great.  They also have a location in Flåm.

## Stegastein viewpoint and Mt. Prest hike


Flåm
