---
permalink: /music-theater/bio-music/
type: page
sidebar:
  nav: "contact"
---

### Short Bio

Armando Fox (Music Director; armandofox.com) has done over 20 Altarena
shows, most recently 2024's Pal Joey, and is always happy to be back.
He's also worked at CCCT, Custom Made, 42nd Street Moon, Theatre
Rhinoceros, and elsewhere, occasionally receiving awards or
nominations for his work.  Thanks to this energetic and dedicated
cast, and especially to Jacquie, Shelly, and Vicki for being such
well-organized and generous collaborators.  You created an environment
in which all of us can both do our best work and fun doing it!  As far
as Armando knows, he's the author of the best book on music direction
written by a computer scientist (pianoconductor.com) and the best
computer science textbook written by a music director (saasbook.info).
By day he is a computer science professor at UC Berkeley.  Check out
his other ongoing music project at CantosDeMiTierra.com.

### Full Bio

Armando Fox is a classically trained (since age 5) pianist who
completed pre-conservatory training at the Mannes College of Music,
New York (now part of the New School). There he studied piano
performance with [Michael
Boriskin](https://www.facebook.com/MichaelBoriskin/) and others, as
well as music theory, ear training, ensemble performance, choir,
arranging, the whole enchilada. He grew up in New York City and loves
the theater; he's Music Directed about two dozen shows and played in
pits for many others. Other theater contributions include
original [orchestrations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-OqIIJURIls) for
Ron Lytle's *[Oh My Godmother!](http://ohmygodmother.com/) *and
workshop arrangements for *[The Man Who Saved
Christmas](http://themanwhosavedchristmas.com/) *(which were replaced
for the CD recording, so the ones on the CD aren't his
work)*; *ambitious reductions (usually to 6 or fewer pieces) of *Man
of La Mancha, Merrily We Roll Along, Assassins, *and others; and
additional original arrangements for *Cabaret, Assassins, *and
others. As far as he knows, he's the author of the best [book on music
direction](http://pianoconductor.com/) written by a computer scientist
and the best [computer science
textbook](http://saasbook.info/) written by a music director. He also
plays actual 80s vintage synthesizers in the 80s cover
band *[Disposable Pop](http://disposablepop.com/); *his previous cover
bands, including *Spoon *and *More at Eleven, *have been finalists in
MIT's Battle of the Bands, surely a distinction far more prestigious
than the Grammy Awards. 

### Generic short bio

Armando Fox is a classically trained (since age 5) pianist who
completed pre-conservatory training at the Mannes College of Music,
New York (now part of the New School), where he studied piano
performance with [Michael
Boriskin](https://www.facebook.com/MichaelBoriskin/) and others as
well as music theory, ear training, ensemble performance, choir,
arranging... the whole enchilada. He grew up in New York City and loves
musicals; he's Music Directed about thirty of them, including several 
original orchestrations or reductions for both classic and new works.
