_pages/teaching.md, before:

---
title: "Teaching"
permalink: /teaching
type: page
layout: single
---

**Spring 2022:**

- [CS 169L](https://cs169L.cs169.org): Software Engineering Team
Project.  Student teams work with real customers (nonprofits & campus
units) to build SaaS.  Requires [CS169A](https://cs169a.cs169.org) or
equivalent experience, as characterized by its textbook [Engineering
Software as a Service](http://saasbook.info).

- [CS 375](https://cs375.org): Teaching Techniques for CS.  Pedagogy,
classroom climate, DEIBJ, and in general being a successful student teacher.

**Fall 2021:**

-   [CS 24-003 Our Digital Quandary](http://digitalquandary.org/) (freshman seminar): The Co-Evolution of Information Technology and Society. Fridays 13:00-14:00 Pacific time, 606 Soda Hall. Limited-enrollment freshman seminar, but the materials and the films we'll watch are available to anyone with a CalNet ID.
-   [CS 375 Teaching Techniques for Computer Science](http://cs375.org/), Fridays 10:00-12:00, 306 Soda Hall.
-   (DeCal sponsor) [CS 198 Cloud Computing DeCal](https://calcloud.org) Led by CS undergrads Ari Rigan and Shane Fan.

**Spring 2021:**

-   [CS 169L Software Engineering Team Project](http://cs169l.cs169.org/) (with Prof. Michael Ball), Wed 12:00-13:00, online
-   CS 399-006 (Supervised Teaching), class# 14225
-   CS 299-031 (Graduate student research), class# 11431
-   CS 199-024 (Undergraduate research), class# 11734
-   CS 99-005 (Undergraduate research), class# 16454

**Fall 2020:**

-   [CS 169A Software Engineering](https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/courses/1497383) (with Prof. Michael Ball), Mon/Wed 17:00-18:30, online
-   [CS 375 Teaching Techniques for Computer Science](https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/courses/1494605), Fri 10:00-12:00, online
-   CS 399-007 (Supervised Teaching), class# 13776
-   CS 299-017 (Graduate student research), class #11259
-   CS 199-015 (Undergraduate research), class# 11589

**Spring 2019: **

-   [CS 169 Software Engineering](http://cs169.saas-class.org/), Tue/Thu 2-3:30, 2060 VLSB
-   CS 375 Teaching Techniques for CS, Mon 10am-noon (through end of March), 101 Life Sciences Addition
-   Office hours: Monday 1-2pm, 732 Soda Hall, or by appointment (email me), except travel days (see at right)

**Spring 2018: **[CS 375 Teaching Techniques for CS](https://edge.edx.org/courses/course-v1%3ABerkeley%2BCS375%2Bspring2016/) (with Randy Katz), Mondays 4-6pm, Woz

-   **Undergraduates interested in CS375**: CS375 as a graduate course requires permission codes for undergraduate students to be able to enroll.  Undergraduates hired as (U)GSIs for CS/EECS classes should contact [Cindy Conners](mailto:csconners@cs.berkeley.edu) to enroll. *After *all CS/EECS (U)GSIs can be accommodated in CS375/EE375, other undergrads can sign up closer to the beginning of the semester.  Please consider signing up for CS370 instead, as it is better set up to handle larger enrollments.

**Always available online at edX: **[Agile Development Using Ruby on Rails](http://saas-class.org/) 

Previous courses
----------------

-   CS169: Fall 2017, Fall 2016, Spring 2016, Spring 2015, Fall 2013, Fall 2012, Spring 2012, Fall 2010. Often co-taught with Prof. David Patterson, until Spring 2016.
-   CS375: Spring 2018, [Spring 2016](https://edge.edx.org/courses/course-v1:Berkeley+CS375+spring2016)
-   Fall 2013: [Autograding and online education technology](https://ucberkeley.instructure.com/courses/1164764) (with Prof. John Canny)

Commit message:

added 2 book reviews and updated teaching page

_pages/teaching.md, after:

---
title: "Teaching"
permalink: /teaching
type: page
layout: single
---

**Fall 2022:**

- [CS 169A](https://cs169a.cs169.org): Fast-paced introduction to the
fundamentals of Agile software engineering, including cloud computing
& SaaS, behavior-driven design with lo-fi mockups and user stories,
test-driven development, working 
with and refactoring legacy code, design patterns, dev/ops,
cloud+client app frameworks, working in Agile teams, and using the
tools professionals use to craft beautiful, maintainable software.

- [CS 375](https://cs375.org): Teaching Techniques for CS.  Pedagogy,
classroom climate, DEIBJ, and in general being a successful student teacher.


**Spring 2022:**

- [CS 169L](https://cs169L.cs169.org): Software Engineering Team
Project.  Student teams work with real customers (nonprofits & campus
units) to build SaaS.  Requires [CS169A](https://cs169a.cs169.org) or
equivalent experience, as characterized by its textbook [Engineering
Software as a Service](http://saasbook.info).

- [CS 375](https://cs375.org): Teaching Techniques for CS.  Pedagogy,
classroom climate, DEIBJ, and in general being a successful student teacher.

**Fall 2021:**

-   [CS 24-003 Our Digital Quandary](http://digitalquandary.org/) (freshman seminar): The Co-Evolution of Information Technology and Society. Fridays 13:00-14:00 Pacific time, 606 Soda Hall. Limited-enrollment freshman seminar, but the materials and the films we'll watch are available to anyone with a CalNet ID.
-   [CS 375 Teaching Techniques for Computer Science](http://cs375.org/), Fridays 10:00-12:00, 306 Soda Hall.
-   (DeCal sponsor) [CS 198 Cloud Computing DeCal](https://calcloud.org) Led by CS undergrads Ari Rigan and Shane Fan.

**Spring 2021:**

-   [CS 169L Software Engineering Team Project](http://cs169l.cs169.org/) (with Prof. Michael Ball), Wed 12:00-13:00, online
-   CS 399-006 (Supervised Teaching), class# 14225
-   CS 299-031 (Graduate student research), class# 11431
-   CS 199-024 (Undergraduate research), class# 11734
-   CS 99-005 (Undergraduate research), class# 16454

**Fall 2020:**

-   [CS 169A Software Engineering](https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/courses/1497383) (with Prof. Michael Ball), Mon/Wed 17:00-18:30, online
-   [CS 375 Teaching Techniques for Computer Science](https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/courses/1494605), Fri 10:00-12:00, online
-   CS 399-007 (Supervised Teaching), class# 13776
-   CS 299-017 (Graduate student research), class #11259
-   CS 199-015 (Undergraduate research), class# 11589

**Spring 2019: **

-   [CS 169 Software Engineering](http://cs169.saas-class.org/), Tue/Thu 2-3:30, 2060 VLSB
-   CS 375 Teaching Techniques for CS, Mon 10am-noon (through end of March), 101 Life Sciences Addition
-   Office hours: Monday 1-2pm, 732 Soda Hall, or by appointment (email me), except travel days (see at right)

**Spring 2018: **[CS 375 Teaching Techniques for CS](https://edge.edx.org/courses/course-v1%3ABerkeley%2BCS375%2Bspring2016/) (with Randy Katz), Mondays 4-6pm, Woz

-   **Undergraduates interested in CS375**: CS375 as a graduate course requires permission codes for undergraduate students to be able to enroll.  Undergraduates hired as (U)GSIs for CS/EECS classes should contact [Cindy Conners](mailto:csconners@cs.berkeley.edu) to enroll. *After *all CS/EECS (U)GSIs can be accommodated in CS375/EE375, other undergrads can sign up closer to the beginning of the semester.  Please consider signing up for CS370 instead, as it is better set up to handle larger enrollments.

**Always available online at edX: **[Agile Development Using Ruby on Rails](http://saas-class.org/) 

Previous courses
----------------

-   CS169: Fall 2017, Fall 2016, Spring 2016, Spring 2015, Fall 2013, Fall 2012, Spring 2012, Fall 2010. Often co-taught with Prof. David Patterson, until Spring 2016.
-   CS375: Spring 2018, [Spring 2016](https://edge.edx.org/courses/course-v1:Berkeley+CS375+spring2016)
-   Fall 2013: [Autograding and online education technology](https://ucberkeley.instructure.com/courses/1164764) (with Prof. John Canny)
