---
title: "Advice on Individual Projects"
permalink: /students/projects
type: page
sidebar:
  nav: "students"
layout: single
---

I often get requests, mostly from undergraduates, who are developing
an independent software-related project and would like advice or
advising.

I generally
cannot offer 1-on-1 advising for independent projects that aren't part
of my research, teaching, and service commitments. 
However, many students have found the following general advice to be
helpful.

**Do you have knowledge of software engineering practices?**  Building
a prototype for learning purposes or for a hackathon is very different
from building something that will have a future and that other people
will actually depend on.  [CS169A](cs169a.cs169.org) teaches the basic
foundations of software engineering (which is quite distinct from
programming) and [CS169L](cs169l.cs169.org) puts those skills to use
in team projects building or enhancing software _pro bono_ for a
nonprofit, NGO, or campus unit.  Without some basic skills, it will be
difficult to get beyond the prototype stage.  If you're not in a
position to take these courses at Cal, most of the material of CS169A
is available through [noncredit courses on edX](edx.cs169.org) and the
textbook can be [downloaded free](saasbook.info) or purchased as
hardcopy or Kindle on Amazon.

**Are you confident the problem you're trying to solve is one for which
people would actually pay for a solution?**  If you're building a
product or service for others to use (as opposed to something you
yourself need), have you talked in detail and face-to-face with your
potential customers?  Are you sure that what you are planning to build
is something they actually would want and would be willing to pay for?
Software people are techno-apologists---very often, something that we
think would be cool turns out to have little value to the actual
customers who would have to pay for it.  A lot of what's in CS169A is
about how to make sure you are building the right thing (as well as
building the thing right---that's testing).

**Beware of the ease of partial success.**  The double-edged sword of
software development is that it's pretty easy to get something that
looks like it partially works.  Sometimes, the path from that to a
usable product is a just a lot of disciplined work.  Other times, and
not infrequently, the design underlying the prototype is simply
unsuitable for "growing" into a real product, and the only path
forward is to learn from the prototype, throw it away, and start
over.  Again, CS169A covers how to approach such situations.

**Can you get the customer involved early?** The earlier you can show
a working prototype to a customer, the earlier you'll know if you're
on the right track and if it's worth going farther.  Of course, if
you're building the project as a way to learn some skill, this doesn't
matter.  But if you have aspirations to solve someone else's problem,
it is distressingly easy to fool yourself into thinking you are doing
so because you haven't been in the shoes of the customer whose problem
you think you're solving.  There is no such thing as too early or too
often when it comes to validating your idea, unless you yourself are
the intended customer and know exactly what you want.

I do wish I had time to advise on independent projects, and if you are
working on a specific project and have a specific question about
technology stacks, software practice, etc., I will do my best to
provide some targeted advice.  The best thing to do is email me with a
statement of your question that is _as specific as possible_ and we'll
see how best to proceed.


