---
title: "Visiting Hong Kong, August 18-23, 2002"
categories: ["Travel"]
---

Day 1: arrival and impressions of downtown
------------------------------------------
We arrived this morning after a 13-hour flight that was remarkably
painless, and took one of the nicest trains ever to downtown. The
train station is conveniently located right inside brand-new Chek Lap
Kok International Airport. (Yes, that's right, Chek Lap
Kok. "Hmmm....yep, still there.")

It is typhoon season, and today was Typhoon Level 1 alert. ("A cyclone
is centered within 800km of Hong Kong.") This translates into a
ferocity of rainfall not seen in the Bay Area and more like
Florida. The rain abruptly starts and stops, as if someone opened a
faucet and then closed it. It turned on and off several times during
the day. (They get 15 inches of rain here just in August.) The typhoon
alerts go up to level 10. The following is verbatim from the Guest
Information brochure in our hotel room: "When typhoon signal 8 is
hoisted, may we suggest you remain inside the hotel to avoid
unnecessary injury from flying objects outside the hotel." Level 8
means sustained winds of 40-75mph with gusts exceeding 125mph. I
assume this means buildings blow over.

And blow over they could. For height, imagine the tallest features of
the skylines of New York, Chicago, San Francisco, etc., but crowded up
against a mountain. (The geography and climate are a little like
Hawaii.) All the apartment buildings are high-rises, but many have a
per-foot area of less than 1000 square feet - basically one small
apartment per floor. The city is completely vertical, including the
double-decker buses and rail trams. The streets are otherwise so busy
that there are networks of covered (often enclosed and
air-conditioned) elevated walkways that almost completely segregate
pedestrian from vehicle traffic. Las Vegas could learn a lesson from
this.

[Below left: View from one of the pedestrian walkways near
Central. Far below: view of the skyline from near the harbor. YOu can
see the walkways are all over the place. Note the double decker buses
and the fairly dramatic rise of the skyscrapers against Victoria
Peak. Below right: what the covered walkways look like]

We spent the morning strolling around Central. (Map forthcoming.) We
wandered through a couple of market streets; Tonia got 3 useful pieces
of clothing for less than $7 total. A lot of these appear to have
cut-out designer labels, suggesting that they were meant for export
but never got shipped or are factory seconds. I'll have to reconsider
my earlier decision to not spend any time shopping. Pants cost a
dollar; you can't go wrong when things cost an order of magnitude
less. (Jack, send me your pants measurements, for the cost of a
pitcher of beer I'll bring back a truckload of pants and you can just
throw out the ones you don't like.)

[Right: Walkways near Chater Garden, a public square] There are
hundreds of Filipinas (no men!) crowded under many of the
walkways. They seem to be there to socialize and play cards. The rain
is presumably why they sit here and not outdoors, and as Tonia pointed
out, there is no park space in Central other than the open space in
which I'm standing at right. Notice also one of the few remaining
Colonial style buildings in the background framed by the skyline.

[Left: view down one of the side streets near Central]

To get a sense of the markets, imagine the busiest streets of any US
Chinatown, but much more so. Every part of the animal is eaten. Tonia
identified liver, colon, miscellaneous guts, stomachs, tendons, and
other parts hanging below the whole
ducks-with-their-heads-still-on. (And that was in the restaurants. The
market stalls had even more bizarre things.) There are stalls with
cages of live chickens so you can look your dinner in the eye
first. Between the unusual foods ("Spiced donkey meat") and the
occasional English misspellings ("Pork Lion with crap-apple sauce"),
it was hard to decide what to eat, but we settled on breakfast from a
chain called Coral Cafe. We got a plate of oatmeal, half a tomato, a
hot dog that tasted more like a cocktail wiener, and a pork sausage
patty and a few green beans, all for about $2. There were some great
looking hole-in-the-wall restaurants, but their menus were only in
Cantonese with no pictures, and we didn't want to end up eating guts
by mistake.

### The triumph of laissez-faire

Hong Kong is what you get when you set up a free market economy with a
credible legal system that protects property rights, populated with
people with an incredible work ethic. There are shopping opportunities
everywhere, from high end department stores to "crap apple sauce" and
everything in between, to the point it seems like buying and selling
is all people do here. We saw no beggars or loiterers - everyone was
doing something. Every square foot of usable area is made productive;
there are even elevated covered outdoor escalators a kilometer long
that bring dwellers of the "mid-levels" (up on the hillside) down to
Central in the morning and back up in the afternoon. There is no
litter, anywhere, and graffiti and vandalism are very rare.

After lunch and a sit in the Luk Yu (pronounced "Look You") Tea Room &
Dim Sum, we took a joyride on the tram to a neighborhood called Happy
Valley (really!). The trams have double-decker designs that date from
the turn of the century ("Since 1899" announces one), and they
resemble a sideways cereal box on wheels. The bumpy ride is like those
cheap amusement park fun houses, but it's great for sightseeing and
people watching. We watched one local guy hitting on a young woman
(who I'm guessing was a sex worker) probably fishing for a little Chek
Lap Kok of his own. (Sorry, I couldn't resist.)

All in all, our first impression is very good. All the signs are
bilingual English/Cantonese, it's really easy to get around, many
people speak English, and it really does feel very international -
even my US cell phone works here (as do Japanese and European phones -
unthinkable). Also, so far, everything has been really inexpensive
(except the hotel, but even that is reasonable at $125 a night for the
convention rate). I just hope the Chinese don't piss in the soup and
ruin everything here.

We are planning to take a trip farther into mainland China, where
nobody speaks English and I suspect things are quite different than
they are in HK. Also today (Monday) is supposed to be a Typhoon level
3 day. Stay tuned.


## Day 3: If You Wanna Know, You Gotta Go

Our plans for mainland China
fell through since it takes >24 hours to obtain a visa for entry. "One
country, two systems". But, we did decide to take a tour of one of the
outlying islands more rural in character, and to go to a high-end
Cantonese cuisine restaurant for our last dinner here.

### Lamma Island:
This island is only a 30 minute ferry ride around the back (south)
side of Hong Kong island. The harbor is amazingly crowded, mostly with
ferries and container ships. The latter are interesting because they
have their own onboard cranes - a bunch of them sidle up to a big
container oceanliner and pick containers off.  Presumably there's a
lot of small container ports around HK,

[Left: harbor view from ferry enroute to Lamma Island. The dinner
restaurant we ate at (end of narrative) is in the Hyatt Hotel, one of
the buildings to the left of the Philips sign.

Below: fishing village harbor entrance to Lamma Island.]

Lamma is boggy and rural, with virtually no cars on the island (it's a
few tens of square miles) but paved walking paths all around it.  Some
people use golf carts, or mostly bikes.  (In fact it's a lot like
Catalina Island is to LA.)  The two villages at which ferries dock are
also fishing centers, and there were a lot of merchants skinning and
otherwise dressing dead fish, many in buckets in the hot sun. We
decided to take the walking trail to two different beaches (about 2
miles, but very hilly), and on the way we happened to see a
cobra. Right in the middle of the path, too, so that we had to
stop. This was a small cobra, either very young or a different
variety, and at first I thought it was just a garden snake that had
learned the trick of rearing up its head like you always see cobras
doing in nature shows. But one of the locals standing by assured us
that it was indeed a cobra, and then proceeded to beat the daylights
out of it with a stick, finally tossing the dead snake to a
cat. (Doesn't anybody here have any dignity in what they eat?)

[Below: paved walking paths around the island; view from one of the
overlooks.]

We did make it to Lo So Shing beach (the trail is very well signed, in
Cantonese and English) and bathed in the South China Sea. (Now we've
bathed at both shores of the Pacific and at a point about halfway in
between!) The water was refreshing, but milky (not clear like the
Caribbean), and the seafloor included a lot of very sharp and
barnacle-encrusted rocks that you can't see through the milky water,
so that if you were bathing here during high surf, you would be cut to
ribbons.

[Right: Both beaches had a "shark prevention net" about 100 yards out
from shore, and signs urged bathers to stay within the net. According
to a local lifeguard, though, the day we were there was very low shark
danger. My concern was really more about biological pollution than
sharks, but so far we have been OK. (There are warnings not to eat
locally caught shellfish due to risk of getting Hepatitis A.) Shark
boom barely visible around the beach, which is the rightmost of the
two inlets.]

Walking back from the beach to the other ferry pier, we saw a spider
that probably could have eaten the cobra - it was the size of an
average hand fully outstretched, and Tonia says larger in diameter
than a tarantula. My guess is it'll end up in an omelet somewhere.

### Dinner

To understand dinner, first imagine a walk through New York's or SF's
Chinatown. Animal parts of all kinds are simmering in big vats. (See
our earlier email.) Salads are prepared by depositing chopped viscera
on top of wilty lettuce. Now imagine a street packed with stalls like
this to black-hole density, with poor ventilation. Finally, imagine
all this in near-100-degree humidity and hot weather. The result is a
fetid miasma that is novel for the first few minutes but quickly
becomes disgusting.

I say this because a lot of the food we ordered at a very high end
restaurant sadly had this same aspect. We went to an elegant,
highly-recommended Cantonese high cuisine restaurant. In retrospect
the menu makes sense: there is no way to disguise that something is,
e.g., a fish head, so instead you make a feature out of that fact and
display the head proudly. Dishes on our menu included: marinated goose
intestines; marinated goose liver and kidney; double-boiled fish maw
soup; crispy-fried goose webs (as in webbed feet); and a whole menu
section on "shark fin" (in soup, braised, etc.) We settled for the
most innocuous-sounding items: mixed steamed vegetables with bamboo
pith (which unfortunately has the same texture as stomach), and
barbecue combination (after being assured it was barbecued meats we
were getting, not organs). The barbecue was OK but smelled like it had
been cooked in the street-stall environment described above. The goose
was like dark chicken meat, but I don't understand why they don't
serve the breast meat, which I thought was the best part. I think we
got something between the wings.

To be adventurous I also ordered warm Chinese rice wine, which
actually wasn't bad by itself. (The waiter warned me against it,
evidently noticing our ambivalent reaction to the food. "It is for...a
different taste," he had said, but I insisted on trying.) The wine
came with a little plate of shriveled up plums, which turned out to be
pickled and sugar-glazed, maybe not in that order. I thought you were
supposed to eat them separately, and it turned out to be the worst
mouthful of food I've ever had, even worse than when I ate a whole
habanero pepper in Cancun several years ago. It was too salty, too
sweet, and too bitter all at once. The waiter then suggested what I
should do was submerge them (the plums, not habanero peppers) in the
wine, which didn't improve their flavor any but did ruin the otherwise
interesting taste of the wine. Both plums ended up under the table,
which fortunately had a floor-length tablecloth.

We were certainly calorie negative for dinner. Tonia didn't make it
past the first bite of barbecue, except for a few forkfuls of fried
rice. Most of my own calories were from the endless glasses of Scotch
I kept ordering to disinfect my mouth between foods. And this is high
cuisine - well dressed people here were paying big bucks for fish
heads. We concluded that Cantonese food is just not tasty in any form,
and thought strongly about sending a "wish you were here" postcard to
Chef Chu's restaurant (Hunan/Szechuan with a California twist,
650-948-2696) in Mountain View, which I thought had set the standard
for good Chinese.

It's just as well that it was our last dinner here, since today we
were in no mood to eat anything non-Western. I still feel a little
unclean from the experience and will probably eat at McDonald's at the
airport.
