---
title: "The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the Twenty-First Century"
categories: ["Book summary","Pop culture"]
---

# The Wealth of Humans: Work, Power, and Status in the Twenty-first Century, by Ryan Avent. St. Martin's Press, 2016.

What follows is my summary of the book's main argument. There's a
number of useful reviews on Amazon, including some written by very
informed people who disagree with key points of the author's
argument. The main objection seems to be that the author overstates
the extent to which income inequality is an inevitable by-product of
technological change (section 1 of my summary below), and understates
the extent to which it is affected by politics/institutional
decisions, e.g. infrastructure spending programs that can locally
increase labor demand and social conventions to boost wages. 

### Executive summary

In most economically free societies, the two mechanisms of
wealth-sharing are work (employers shift wealth to employees by paying
them) and redistribution (taxes pay for goods and services that may
not be redistributed in proportion to how much you paid), and the
society has a definition of who is "in" (eligible to participate in
both mechanisms). This book asks: What happens to these mechanisms
when increasing automation is squeezing the first, and those
controlling the wealth are opposed to expanding the reach of the
second?

Its overall responses are: (1) while it's true that policy everywhere
has tipped to favor wealth concentration, the essential problem is
structural; (2) As a result of this fundamental structural problem,
most efforts to "create jobs" will run into problems that ultimately
doom them; (3) therefore, for better or worse, some form of
non-labor-based redistribution will become necessary (eg universal
basic income).

### 1.  Productivity-enhancing technology thwarts a balanced labor market 

Henry Ford's innovation was to de-skill individual roles to vastly
decrease the cost and increase the per-employee productivity of making
cars; precisely because the de-skilled jobs were tedious, he raised
wages and coddled his employees to attract labor and reduce turnover,
something he could afford to do because of their high
productivity. But this scenario comes with 3 problems.

First, the high productivity makes it affordable to pay higher wages,
but workers in low-productivity industries such as education and
healthcare that suffer from Baumol's "cost disease" (it costs about
the same to educate 1 student or care for 1 patient as it ever has)
are in the same labor market, so their wages must rise *despite*
stagnant productivity, thereby increasing the cost to the consumer of
purchasing those goods or services. That is, wealthy companies can
afford to pay employees more because of the employees' much higher
productivity, so that most income inequality is due to wage gaps
*between* firms/sectors rather than within them.

Second, productivity-enhancing de-skilling paves the way for complete
automation of those jobs, so the benefit to low-skill workers is
short-lived.

Third, since higher productivity leads to a labor glut even before
automation takes over, it pushes wages down. This is bad because while
the effective price of some goods also falls due to that productivity
(cars, cell phones), the effective price of others doesn't, either
because supply is scarce (housing) or because they suffer from
Baumol's cost disease of stagnant productivity (education,
healthcare).

This is an example of how "job creation" systems can end up working
against themselves. Future employment opportunities will likely
satisfy at most 2 of the following 3 conditions ("employment
trilemma"): (1) high productivity and wages, (2) resistant to
automation, (3) potential to absorb large amounts of labor. To see the
dynamic, consider the solar-panel industry. Increased productivity in
manufacturing solar panels has caused them to drop in cost, creating a
large market for solar panel installers, a job resistant to automation
(meets criteria 2 and 3). But that same increased productivity means
most of the cost of acquiring solar is the installation labor,
limiting wage growth for installers (fails criterion 1). As another
example, consider healthcare. As technology increases the productivity
of (or automates) other aspects of care delivery, healthcare jobs will
concentrate in non-automatable services requiring few skills besides
bedside manner and the willingness to do basic and often unpleasant
caregiver tasks. As a third, consider artisanally-produced goods,
whose low productivity is part of their appeal (meets 1 and 2). But
the market for them is limited to the small subset of people who can
afford to buy them (fails 3).

Can education help? Higher educational attainment is still key to high
wages, but not to high wage *growth*. The level of education required
for that has been climbing higher and higher, putting it beyond the
economic (and possibly intellectual) reach of most people, yet those
are precisely the credentials needed to participate in the most
lucrative parts of the economy. The displaced workers "trickle down"
the skill-level chain and depress wages even higher in the wage
hierarchy. So improving education, while a good idea, won't help
people in poor countries as much as simply moving them into a rich
country to work in that economy.

### 2.  Hence, social capital is increasingly key to successful companies...

Since WW2, developed-nation economies have increasingly
"dematerialized" to where most of the value in goods being produced
was in knowledge-worker contributions, rather than physical
manufacturing or the labor therein. (iPhones and cars are built
overseas, yet most of their value is in design and software, which
aren't outsourced.) Increasingly, the "wealth" of a company is not in
its capitalization or even the material output of its employees, but
its "culture" -- its way of absorbing, refactoring, and acting on
information in a value-added way that is difficult to replicate and
produces a product customers want to buy.

(This is also why cities are resurgent -- they permit a dense
social/living fabric that promotes evolution of social capital, and
the larger/denser the city, the more productive it becomes because of
this effect, supporting high levels of specialization and social
networks that facilitate labor mobility. The demand results in high
housing costs, but NIMBYs oppose building more housing because even
though the benefits would be spread over the whole city, the costs
would be concentrated in their neighborhood.)

By definition, culture is a group phenomenon, not a set of rules
handed down by a boss. Social capital cannot be exported like material
goods; all you can do is try to create (or impose) conditions under
which it can develop by allowing the free flow of ideas and labor (ie,
the people in whose heads social capital lives), as the EU is trying
to do within Europe. This is troubling for developing economies whose
societies lack social capital.

Hence, China, having spent a fortune to create physical infrastructure
to improve worker productivity, has reached diminishing returns:
further productivity improvements must now come from "deepening" the
workers' social capital, which has been wrecked by decades of cultural
mismanagement by a totalitarian regime. Similarly, India's outsourcing
boom and China's hyper-rapid industrialization occurred because
technology allowed them to temporarily bypass the difficult step of
building social capital, by "biting off" chunks of activity taking
place in richer economies: India hosting outsourced call centers, or
China jumping into a global supply chain established by rich economies
and uniquely facilitated by the digital economy, in both cases
offering labor at lower cost. But this era is ending: other countries
can play the same trick (eg Indonesia as the new China, depressing
Chinese wages), automation is coming, and the relative advantage to
outsourcing decreases as products become more
information-centric. (Though note that while "reshoring" is happening,
it's not creating more jobs: Tesla would rather pay a few highly
skilled engineers to oversee an automated assembly plant than pay lots
of low-skilled factory workers to build something manually and less
reliably elsewhere.)

It used to be thought that poor countries were poor because they
lacked financial capital, but it's now clear that they can build
factories without resulting in good social capital (India,
China). Indeed, highly-educated workers in poor countries become more
productive when they move to rich countries, suggesting it's the
country's social capital that is lacking.

### 3.  ...yet the benefits of social capital don't accrue to those who create and embody it 

Yet as important as social capital is, when a worker leaves a company,
his knowledge of that company's "culture" is generally not useful at a
new firm, so he has little leverage (though this is somewhat
counterbalanced by the pressure to not have *most* workers quit, which
would destroy the culture). Conversely, a chief executive is harder
and costlier to replace, so has more leverage as an individual. Herein
lies the problem: "social capital" is in the collective heads of
individual workers, but its benefits flow disproportionately to the
owners of financial capital. A corollary is that the efficiency gains
achieved by fluid (ie non-unionized) labor markets haven't been
redistributed to the workers whose bargaining power was sacrificed to
achieve those efficiencies. Marx predicted that that dynamic was
unsustainable, and the society would collapse because either the
workers would revolt and upend the government and the social norms it
curates, hence destroying the wealth for everyone, or that the
wealth-owners would asymptotically reach a point where no further
wealth could be generated and harvested so they'd start fighting each
other over the fixed amount of wealth, again destroying the
society. Piketty notes that the 2 world wars did a lot to disrupt this
downward slide because wars, taxation, inflation, and depression
destroyed many of the superconcentrated fortunes made in the
industrial age, but as noted above, the change was temporary.

The consequence of this structural problem is that some form of
non-labor-based redistribution is likely to be the only nonviolent way
forward. This path has at least two challenges. One is that the act of
doing work has other benefits -- agency, dignity, reinforcement of
socially-useful values -- that would be lost; although surveys show
that people saddled with extra free time due to weak job markets tend
to spend it sleeping or watching TV, ie, at leisure. A second
challenge is that such "highly redistributive" societies tend to
emerge in ethnically/nationally coherent political units, and motivate
the society to draw a tight boundary around itself. E.g. Scandinavian
countries have generous welfare states that make them desirable to
immigrate into, but as a result the load on the welfare system
generated by lots of immigration is tearing at the seams of their
welfare economies. That is, we can't expect rich liberal countries to
throw open their borders heedlessly when the potential pool of
immigrants dwarfs those working to generate the wealth that is
redistributed.
