---
title: "The Next America: Boomers, Millennials, and the Looming Generational Showdown"
categories: ["Book summary","Pop culture"]
---
# The Next America: Boomers, Millennials, and the Looming Generational Showdown, by Paul Taylor. PublicAffairs, 2016.

To paraphrase a famous scientist, the nice thing about data is that it
doesn't matter whether you believe it or not. This book contains a
tremendous amount of (summarized) data about the current and future
demographics of the United States, gathered from both public sources
(eg statistics published by the Bureau of the Census, the IRS, and
other Federal agencies) and from one of the world's best-known
nonpartisan survey-based research foundations (Pew).

I'd summarize the biggest takeaways as follows:

**Generational attitude shift. **The combination of immigration,
intermarriage, and changing social morés among younger generations
(the author identifies today's primary generational groups from oldest
to youngest as Silent, Boomers, GenX, and Millennials) mean that the
social attitudes of current and future voters lean overwhelmingly
towards what most people would associate with "progressive values" or
with the Democratic Party. In particular, as the Republican Party has
tacked farther and farther to the right, the segment of the electorate
receptive to their messages is shrinking and in fact dying. On the
other hand, these younger-but-growing segments of the electorate have
a much poorer voter-turnout record than their older and more
conservative counterparts. This combination of elements has profound
consequences for future elections.

**Socioeconomic consequences of an aging population. **The biggest
coming "showdown" (to which the subtitle alludes) is the aging of the
world's population. Japan, China, and some European nations will get
there ahead of the US, in part because although birth rates are
falling everywhere throughout the developed world, in the US that
effect is partially offset by immigration, especially economically
(since most immigrants arrive ready to work rather than newborn). But
all these countries are rapidly approaching a point where fewer and
fewer working people are supporting more and more seniors. (In Japan
the ratio will approach 1:1 by about 2040 if current trends continue.)
There is an unfortunate positive feedback loop in countries like the
US where most legislation is made democratically: the older
generations constitute a large and growing voter bloc to whom
politicians must cater, and that bloc has been using its influence to
appropriate a growing share of government wealth redistribution. In
the US, Social Security and Medicare are basically on the ropes. At
some level most of us know this, but the statistics and trends
presented to quantify the situation are stark.

In other words: not only will the older and younger generations find
themselves at odds economically on how to redistribute wealth, but
their positions will be even farther apart because their social
contexts are so different. As the author states in the introduction,
"either transformation by itself would be the dominant demographic
story of its era."

The book does a nice job of including enough charts and graphs inline
when necessary to illustrate or back up a point, but relegating vastly
more charts and tables to an Appendix you can browse at leisure or for
more detail.

There is also a fascinating and well written appendix describing in
high level terms the survey methodologies used by Pew and other
professional research organizations, for those who think surveys are
just a matter of asking some questions and tabulating answers. The
appendix covers random sampling; a lay-person explanation of sampling
error and reweighting; various biases including recency, confirmation,
and self-selection; running meta-surveys to test the effect of
different phrasings or presentations of the same questions; and much
more. Indeed, this appendix is useful reading for anyone involved in
doing rigorous surveys, whether they are interested in the rest of the
book's content or not.

Whether it cheers you up, depresses you, or just causes you to raise
an eyebrow may depend on where you fall on the political spectrum, but
regardless of where you do, this is essential and well-reported
information.
