---
title: "America in the Seventies"
categories: ["Book summary","Pop culture"]
---
# America in the Seventies (Culture America series) by Beth Bailey and David R. Farber. University Press of Kansas, 2004.

The premise of this book, as with similar books of observations of the
American 70s by other writers, could be summed up as "the 70s is when
the 60s were implemented." While the seeds of civil rights, gender
equality, labor solidarity, etc. may have been sown in the 60s, the
actual policies that put these ideas in practice happened during the
70s. At the same time, the US confronted a series of setbacks: Vietnam
was not only a military embarrassment with enormous human costs, but a
war that polarized the nation on moral grounds, with none of the moral
clarity or national purpose of WW II; expanded government programs and
higher-paid labor to meet the social demands of the 60s, combined with
the replacement of American heavy industry with imported goods and the
movement of labor-intensive production overseas, resulted in
"stagflation" (inflation combined with economic stagnation); the Arab
oil shocks painfully emphasized America's utter dependence on the whim
of a small group of nations whose culture in some ways could not be
further from our own. Richard Nixon's Watergate scandal made the
public cynical that the government was not only incapable of resolving
these economic woes, but lacked integrity and was not invested in the
well being of the middle class. Social structures were challenged by
movements involving gender roles, racial identity, and sexual
identity, destabilizing social norms that were perceived to have
anchored the country for decades and leaving many people casting about
for their personal identity and purpose as well as confidence in their
country. This toxic combination led to a nationwide anomie and
alienation as expressed in gritty (and now-iconic) 70s movies
like *Taxi Driver, Looking for Mr. Goodbar, Midnight
Cowboy, *and* Saturday Night Fever.* 

One very significant result of this existential crisis was the
emergence of the New Right with the Reagan election of 1980. By
latching on to the common denominators of dissatisfaction with
government incompetence and corruption and the alienation bred by
changing social roles, the New Right assembled a constituency of
anti-tax activists, critics of "big government", and the religious
right. Reagan and his successors used this mandate to gut the
government altogether, following an existing conservative agenda that
just needed dusting off after losing its social luster during the
60s. 

The book is a collection of well chosen independent essays, each
treating one of these social or economic upheavals in detail. As an
academic myself, I approached it with some trepidation since academic
writing can be ponderous and needlessly self-indulgent, but these are
vigorously written and eminently readable by a non-expert like me. I
commend the editors on their choices, though I would have enjoyed some
connective material to introduce each essay or place it in the context
of the larger themes, as is common in "edited by"
collections. Notwithstanding, this is a highly readable and
informative account of how the "me decade" of the 70s, in trying to in
implement the social reforms of the 60s, ironically enabled the rise
of the New Right and "greed is good" in the 80s. 
