---
title: Istanbul, Day 1
categories: Travel
---

Erol, our private guide, came to meet us at 9am. The first stop was
the site of the former Roman hippodrome. When Constantine beat out his
rival to become the sole ruler of the Roman Empire (this was before
Rome fell in 476), as was traditional for the Romans, he brought shit
from the empire to adorn his new capital city, which he renamed from
Byzantium to Constantinople. When the Turks toppled Constantinople,
the hippodrome fell into disrepair because the Turks weren’t into
horse racing, but the open plaza remains, as do the monuments that
were in the center median of the elliptical hippodrome track: two
Egyptian obelisks and a bronze serpentine column the Romans brought
here from temple of Apollo at Delphi (sweet irony, since it had been
moved to Delphi from this region when the Greeks conquered the
Persians). The obelisk that looks better-preserved and is one solid
piece (traditional for Egyptian obelisks) was taken by the Romans from
the Temple of Karnak in Luxor, Egypt, which is kind of cool because it
is one of a twin pair and I have seen its twin (though that was back
in 1998). 

![Obelisk brought from Temple of Apollo at Delphi](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6174.jpeg)

![Obelisk brought from Temple of Karnak in Luxor, Egypt](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6180.jpeg)


The next two stops were the Blue Mosque and Hagia Sophia. There are
photos of these all over the Internet, plus the Blue Mosque is
undergoing extensive restoration so what you could see inside was
limited, but it was impressive for what it was. But of course the
Hagia Sophia ("Holy Wisdom"—an innocuous impersonal name that saved it
from being renamed by Muslims later) is what people come here to
see. Built in 537 as a Christian church by Justinian (well, really
slaves did the work, Justinian just commanded it) of brick coated with
plaster, it was actually the third church on this site. The second was
destroyed by taxation riots (“Lock her up! Lock her up!”) but
fragments remain, giving a glimpse into a transitional period around
the time it became legal to be openly Christian in the Roman Empire
and before a new architectural language had developed for decorating
Christian buildings; the motifs on the ruins include some halfhearted
crosses, but a lot of the imagery has more in common with earlier
pagan temples.

The Hagia Sophia was originally largely unadorned because it was built
during the iconoclastic period. This was a case of religious practice
(Islam forbids images of deities or prophets in its places of worship)
spilling over too enthusiastically into secular life. The prohibitions
were lifted around the 10th century, when amazing mosaics were
installed; these were subsequently plastered over (but not defaced) by
the Turks in the 16th c. when it became a mosque. Some are in better
shape than others, but a notable aspect of the artwork is its
humanistic appearance, which presaged the Renaissance and was a stark
departure from medieval art.

![Inside the Hagia Sophia](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6182.jpeg)



At the time HS was built, it was the largest enclosed space under a
dome in the world. (It’s now the fourth largest, after St. Peter’s in
Rome, St. Paul’s in London, and the Seville Cathedral. It occurs to me
I’ve visited all those places in order of descending size.)

Lunch was in a small knot of alleys in Sultanahmet that have a bunch
of restaurants where locals eat, surprisingly for an otherwise
touristy area. Turkish food is awesome, and I was not disappointed by
my entrée of Iskender in casserole—basically gyro meat sliced and
marinated in a really amazing sauce, and the whole thing baked with
vegetables and topped with sour cream or something. Whatever it was,
it was amazing.

![Mmm! Iskender](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6185.jpeg)


Almost none of the non-tourist restaurants serve beer or wine. Turkey
isn’t a teetotaling culture like Morocco, but it is definitely
partitioned. There are bars and taverns where locals go to consume
beer, wine, and rakı, a national anise-flavored spirit that I’ve grown
to like and am enjoying right now as I write this. But in most
restaurants, it’s juice, soft drinks, and of course tea in those tiny
cups.

Over lunch I got to learn some about Turkish politics, as Erol was
quite forthcoming. As he pointed out, Istanbul has way more mosques
than it needs for its population. People don’t mind because the sound
of so many live muezzin calls makes them feel good about their
religion. But the muezzins and the imams are paid public servants—as
Americans we often take separation of church and state for granted,
but in Turkey, the Department of Religious Affairs pays these folks a
salary from public dollars. And every Friday, the imams are given a
message from the Department (whose head is appointed by the President)
to convey to the faithful. As public servants, they’d basically lose
their jobs if they refused to do this. And these days, the messages
are propaganda from Erdogan against the ruling party. So basically the
mosques provide a taxpayer-funded mouthpiece controlled unilaterally
by the President (who, unlike in the US, is basically not answerable
to anyone) whose sprawling network of communications is run by
employees funded at public expense. Hmmm.

We talked about Trump, of course, and Erol said he’d seen TV footage
in which Trump’s limo procession was driving down some US street or
other, and there were protesters shouting obscenities at the passing
motorcade and holding up raunchy signs, “and the police just did
nothing!” In Turkey, he said, the police would have been all over
that—most countries don’t have anything as strong as what we think of
as freedom of speech. So all is perhaps not lost.

After lunch was a trip through the spice market, locally called the
Misir market. Misir is the Turkish word for Egypt, and the market got
its name because many of the exotic products originally available
there were shipped through Egypt. (Interestingly, misir also means
corn. New World foods coming to Europe and continuing on to Asia also
came through here, and the name of this particular food became
associated with the name of the market itself. Most other New World
agriculture, such as tomatoes and potatoes, are named in Turkish via
loan words.) At my insistence, Armando stopped at the best Turkish
Delight confectioner in the market, and because the proprietor loved
me, we got some tasty samples of this confection that is made in
dozens of varieties.


![Travel inspecting Turkish Delight choices](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6189.jpeg)


Next it was a walk across the Galata Bridge (all the way across, this
time) to the underground funicular up Galata Hill. Our first quick
stop, at Armando's request, was the Hotel Pera Palace. It was built in
1892 to give Orient Express passengers a nice place to stay, since
there were no hotels in Istanbul at that time that offered European
service standards. Unlike Sirkeci Station, this hotel still looks
every bit the part; Agatha Christie allegedly stayed here while
writing her famous novel, and Hemingway was apparently a regular
visitor too, along with Rita Hayworth and some other Hollywood
nobility.

![Lounge/Dining room in the Hotel Pera Palace](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6192.jpeg)

The queue for the Galata Tower was too long, so we did a nice walk
around Beyoglu (the shopping area around Galata) instead before
heading back to the historical center, where we parted ways with Erol.

We decided to use the rest of the afternoon to cruise around different
neighborhoods. Erol had recommended Kadiköy, a 20 minute ferry ride
away on the Asian side of the Bosphorus, as an up-and-coming cultural
neighborhood, so we went there. It was nice enough, but the highlights
were really the ferry ride and the long walk along the waterfront in
Kadiköy. The photo is hazy but you can see the first Bosphorus Bridge
behind me; on the right is Asia, on the left is Europe (north/east
shore of the Golden Horn), and where your right shoulder is when
you're looking at this picture is the historic center (south/west
shore of the Golden Horn).

![Betwixt Europe and Asia](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6197.jpeg)

We got on the wrong ferry when trying to return homeward (Armando
thought “Besiktas” meant “departure,” but it was actually the name of
a neighborhood…the fool), though easily rectified by a bus ride thanks
to our handy Istanbul Kart, which Armando is adding to his collection
“transit cards of the world.” (Honestly, who collects that?) Anyway,
by bus we managed to get back to Galata easily enough, and as there's
no shortage of rooftop bars and cafés there, we chose one more or less
at random that claimed to offer a good view of the city, which was
true.

![A view from Galata](/assets/img/2019-07-24-istanbul-1/IMG_6200.jpeg)

A pretty full day overall—we rode trams, a funicular, two old-time
streetcars, and two ferries. The only thing we didn't ride was the
subway! But there'll be time for that tomorrow, after seeing Topkapı
Palace and maybe some museums!
