---
title: "America in the Seventies"
categories: ["Book summary","Urbanism"]
---

# The Economy of Cities, by Jane Jacobs

The received wisdom in urban history (at least as of the writing of
this book in the late 1960s) was that cities evolved from towns and
villages, which in turn evolved from agricultural-collective-type
organizations or hamlets.  Jacobs challenges this view and cites
archeological evidence of cities developing _before_ their surrounding
rural villages and towns developed.

The main idea behind Jacobs's theory of how this could have happened
is that cities, as dense gathering places for people, are places
where _new work and therefore new economic value is most readily
created_.  The various chapters of the book explore different
manifestations of this principle.


## Concentration of people and goods leads to new opportunities

A city arises because of proximity an economic asset,
such as a concentration of a natural resource, a good
harbor, etc.  Of course it cannot produce most of what it needs,
but since others come there to benefit from the economic asset, it
becomes a natural mixing point for various things to happen:

In preindustrial times, different variants of food (seeds,
livestock) would naturally mix there.  Citizens (in the literal sense:
inhabitants of the city) would become the stewards of these, breeding
and selecting and developing what would later be called agricultural
husbandry.  Before long, it would be more profitable to outsource the
agriculture to plots farther away from the city where land is less
dear, so the villages would really arise more like factory towns arose
after the first industrial revolution.

Over time, cities replace their imports as they develop the local
expertise to make them.  This frees up capital that was previously
spent on imports to create new work inside the city.  If this capital
can be put to work to create new products or value that can then be
*exported* from the city, its economy will grow further.  If not, the
its economy may stagnate.  Import replacement creates a fixed amount
of new local value, but its side effects (export creation) can
initiate a further cycle of import replacement of something else.

By contrast, agricultural expansion tracks the growth of city jobs,
not of rural jobs, because technology tends to make existing
agriculture workers more productive, reducing the need for
agricultural labor even as cities' demand for agricultural products
increases.  (Denmark in the early 20th century, for example, was
capable of producing lots of food, but had no market for it, hence its
economy could not expand by that means.  The explosive growth of
London provided this market, which fueled the development of
Copenhagen as a city that then started doing its own import
replacements and in turn providing a larger *domestic* market for
Danish agriculture.)  In this sense, every city has ancestry in one or
more older cities.

## Creation of new work

Cities naturally become places where new work can arise from old.
The first brassieres were made by a dressmaker who didn't like the way
her dresses draped over clients; she later got out of the dressmaking
business and focused on brassieres.  When bicycles were first imported
to Japan, there was no local capacity for manufacturing them; but as
repair shops arose and got better, they incrementally developed into
manufacturing capacity.  

Being a supplier with a large dynamic market also stimulates
serendipitous new work.  3M was originally a provider of sand
abrasives that tried to get into the sandpaper business, but its
adhesives failed to stick the sand to the paper.  However, in
experimenting with adhesives, they invented masking tape, Scotch tape,
and so on.  Without the motivation to expand the market for their
original products, these accidental innovations wouldn't have
happened.  

The rise of such new work enables new industries that rely on that
work.  Henry Ford initially sourced all of his components from
different manufacturers in Detroit, thereby being able to promise his
customers that they would always be able to obtain spare parts when
needed.  Over time, he developed the capacity to manufacture the most
commonly needed parts himself, eventually moving towards more vertical
integration. 

(A subtle note is that mass-production-style hyperdivision of labor,
in and of itself, may increase efficiency up to a point but does not
create new work.  However, sometimes the isolation of specific
subtasks ends up pointing to a new _use_ for that subtask outside the
scope of the main task of which it is a part, so division of labor can
be thought of as paving the way for potential later creation of new
work.)

Sometimes this cycle starts from a completely different place.
Detroit was originally an agricultural town, where mills arose to
service regional wheat cultivation.  The local shops that made mill
parts found they could also make parts for ships plying the nearby
Great Lakes.  From that new branch of industry developed independent
shops producing upholstery, paints, varnishes, and so on.  When the
agricultural basis for Detroit collapsed or was co-opted, these new
industries more than filled its place, and played a role in enabling
the future economy of the auto industry.

Finally, this kind of diversity allows for an export-oriented economy:
once you have enough suppliers to make more of your product than the
local market can consume, you can start exporting it.  In an export
economy, the city trades something it values less (the exports) for
something it values more (capital for use in future growth or to raise
the local standard of living), the canonical wealth-creating transaction.

## Resiliency through "inefficient" diversity

The built-in "inefficiencies" of cities make them resilient.  Cities
that hyperoptimize efficiency in a single industry can go bust if that
industry commoditizes; cities that have a variety of smaller
industries can find other uses for those industries.  Hyperoptimizing
also calls for making a few large ("efficient") investments rather
than many small ones, but the latter gives more resiliency since it
makes small amounts of capital opportunistically available for the
incremental creation of new work.

Returning to the 3M example, the adhesives innovations wouldn't have
happened if 3M had been the abrasives
division of, say, a paint company rather than being a separate
company: there would have been an economic disincentive to expend any
effort on a new product such as sandpaper at all.

Indeed, to the extent that some of these smaller businesses begin as
spin-offs from larger companies (Jacobs called them "breakaways"),
when a single large company becomes too successful it can stifle this
dynamic, as Eastman Kodak did in Rochester by buying up many of its
suppliers and subsequently doing everything possible to discourage
"spin-offs".  Jacobs was writing in 1969, and did not see the demise
of Rochester in the 1990s when digital photography decapitated Kodak,
and with it, Rochester; nor the demise of the American auto industry,
and Detroit with it, in the 1970s and 80s.

A city with a diversified supplier economy also makes it easier to
start new businesses based on that economy, which is another way of
creating new economic value.  In the 20th century, starting a new
publishing house in New York was relatively easy because all of the
component labor was locally available.  In Silicon Valley, all kinds
of technical talent is available for startups to pick from.  In
Shenzhen, the concentration of the world's best manufacturing supply
chains makes it relatively easy to manufacture a new high-tech
product.

In parallel with the "beneficial inefficiencies" of big cities, Jacobs
calls attention to their beneficial impracticalities: things that
become troublesome as the city scales.  In a healthy city, such a
situation will create a demand for technological solutions; but a
healthy city is one with lots of small businesses and opportunistic
small amounts of capital, providing the kindling for such a fire.  The
alternative is a city in which a few large companies dominate and
serve the needs of a (probably small) cadre of well-paying customers.
(Wealthy Romans had hot water and indoor plumbing, but most
middle-class Romans had slaves carry water in and out in vessels.)  In
Jacobs's words, "When humble people doing lowly work are not also
solving problems, no one is apt to solve humble problems."  This is
probably why we have so many startups dedicated to shaving a few
minutes off of quotidian tasks of middle-class white people and so few
startups actually solving real problems that real people who _don't_
work for such startups actually have, the so-called "unglamorous"
problems. 

Finally, Jacobs addresses population, and the idea that high
population (or high density) results in more poverty.  She gives
example after example of non-dense rural counties that not only
haven't improved when people emigrated to cities, they have become
poorer.  Prosperity is not an automatic effect of density, but neither
is poverty, and in fact cities are more likely to provide non-stagnant
opportunities for getting ahead.  (Certainly the current citizens of
India and China believe this, given the monumental urban migrations
happening continuously in both countries; Latin America 
seems [not far behind]({% post_url 2018-12-13-radical-cities %}).)

A corollary of all this is that one cannot place production capacity in somewhere
that doesn't have access to this economic infrastructure (market,
suppliers that enable spin-offs and creation of new work, etc.)  China
tried to populate villages with factories as part of the Great Leap
Forward, and failed, because there was no economy in village for the
factories to plug into.

Finally, although the term "disruption" wasn't used at the time of
this book's writing the way it is used today, Jacobs identifies it as
the tension between those "whose interests are with already
well-established economic activities, and those whose interests are
with the emergence of new economic activities."  She argues that to
avoid stagnation from the established interests, governments must act
to protect the naturally-weaker position of the "disruptors".  In the
case of the Internet, this has been somewhat true in that it has
largely been maintained as a common utility, even though privately
operated; the dominance of a few large tech companies in 2020 may be
working against this.


