---
title: "Teaching"
permalink: /teaching
type: page
layout: single
---

At Berkeley, every first-time teaching assistant, whether graduate or
undergraduate, is required to take a full-semester pedagogy course
that generally meets 1.5-2.0 hours per week for most of the 14-week
semester.

Each department can offer its own; formats vary, but in general,
students are encouraged but not required to take the course in their
department.

Over the last several years, I've been working with graduate student
(now alumnus) Victor Huang to develop CS375, "Computer Science
Pedagogy", as a course in which we not only cover topics such as
classroom climate, inclusive language, and so on, but actually use
classroom climate as a lens through which even the "core" work of a
TA can be viewed: creating and grading assessments, explaining things verbally or in
writing, interacting with students during office hours or on
asynchronous message boards, and so on.

This [SIGCSE 2023 paper](https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569826)
summarizes the course.  An excerpt from the abstract reads:

> "Our view is that there is no meaningful separation between
> pedagogical and climate skills: rather than "compartmentalizing"
> climate into specific workshops or modules of a course, our
> semester-long required TA preparation course treats classroom climate
> as a lens through which traditional pedagogical skills are viewed,
> such as giving presentations that encourage participation, creating
> equitable assessments, and creating successful student groups by
> fostering belonging. We describe a climate-first, scalable, modular TA
> training curriculum with open-source and curated teaching materials,
> suitable for in-person or remote instruction, that serves hundreds of
> first-time TAs each year, and which student feedback suggests is
> meeting our goals."

Students sit at tables of 4-6, organized by the course they TA.  For
large courses, it's not unusual for 2 tables to map to the same
course; for smaller courses we try to combine similar subject matter
TAs.

Each session (nominally 2 hours, but we often finish a bit early)
usually runs as follows:

* (Usually) Table discussion of a themed prompt about the past week's
TA experience (see below)

* Some didactic material (Google slides) on today's topic

* One or more group activities relating to the topic

For the group activities, we usually allow 5-10 minutes (as
appropriate for the activity) for discussion, and each group
contributes 1 slide to a world-writable Google Slides deck summarizing
the main points of their discussion.

While they are discussing/editing, we (instructors) are "lurking" and
poking around in the slide deck, looking for common themes, unusual
observations, etc.

When discussion time is over, we spend ~10-15 minutes going over the
instructor-summarized points, asking groups to comment further on
points they contributed, and so on.

Most of the time should be spent by the groups interacting with each
other and offering highlight comments during these summary presentation.

## "Reflections on the week" at start of class

A few prompts we have used successfully:

* (Towards beginning of semester) What are you excited about heading
into the first week/first few weeks of being a TA?  What are you
anxious/nervous about?

* (A couple of weeks in, can recur various times) In your section this
week, did you get a chance to use any of the knowledge from this
course in a way that you felt made things better (or worse)?  Did you
run into a situation we haven't covered yet and you wish we had?

* (As midterms approach) Have you started preparing the midterm? How's
it going?  What do you think could be going better?

* (After midterms) Any lessons for preparing/administering/grading the
final, based on midterms/quizzes? 

* (Later in semester) Did anything happen in last couple of weeks that
you didn’t feel prepared to handle well?


## Midterm survey

About halfway through the semester, we do an anonymous survey to see
how things are going.
