---
title: "Teaching"
permalink: /teaching
type: page
layout: single
---

At Berkeley, every first-time teaching assistant, whether graduate or
undergraduate, is required to take a full-semester pedagogy course
that generally meets 1.5-2.0 hours per week for most of the 14-week
semester.

Each department can offer its own; formats vary, but in general,
students are encouraged but not required to take the course in their
department.

Over the last several years, I've been working with graduate student
(now alumnus) Victor Huang to develop CS375, "Computer Science
Pedagogy", as a course in which we not only cover topics such as
classroom climate, inclusive language, and so on, but actually use
classroom climate as a lens through which even the "core" work of a
TA can be viewed: creating and grading assessments, explaining things verbally or in
writing, interacting with students during office hours or on
asynchronous message boards, and so on.

This [SIGCSE 2023 paper](https://doi.org/10.1145/3545945.3569826)
summarizes the course.  An excerpt from the abstract reads:

"Our view is that there is no meaningful separation between
pedagogical and climate skills: rather than "compartmentalizing"
climate into specific workshops or modules of a course, our
semester-long required TA preparation course treats classroom climate
as a lens through which traditional pedagogical skills are viewed,
such as giving presentations that encourage participation, creating
equitable assessments, and creating successful student groups by
fostering belonging. We describe a climate-first, scalable, modular TA
training curriculum with open-source and curated teaching materials,
suitable for in-person or remote instruction, that serves hundreds of
first-time TAs each year, and which student feedback suggests is
meeting our goals."

