---
permalink: /contact/bio-older/
type: page
sidebar:
  nav: "contact"
---
## ESaaS

Armando Fox (fox@berkeley.edu) is a Professor in the Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science Department of the University of
California at Berkeley.  He is also the Faculty Advisor to the UC
Berkeley MOOCLab and a recognized thought leader on MOOCs and online
education, topics on which he has had the honor of addressing the
California legislature, the China Ministry of Education, and the Japan
Top Global University Project, as well as numerous US and
international universities. He also serves on the Technical Advisory
Committee of edX, helping to set the technical direction of their open
MOOC platform, and the Google Online Education Advisory Council. 

With his colleague David Patterson, Fox overhauled Berkeley's software
engineering course, focusing on agile projects with real customers and
heavily guided by modern software practice.  The reinvented course and
accompanying textbook, "Engineering Software as a Service" (now
available in several languages), influenced the ACM/IEEE 2013
Curriculum Guidelines for Software Engineering and the 2014 IEEE
Software Engineering Competency Model (SWECOM).  He has given numerous
keynotes about these topics at SIGCSE, ICSE, CSEET, and other leading
venues on computer science education.  The book and course also form
the basis of Berkeley's first Massive Open Online Course on
"Engineering Software as a Service", offered through edX, through
which over 10,000 students in over 120 countries have earned
certificates of completion. Fox's continued research on improving
student engagement in blended courses and on novel forms of
autograding, such as automatic hint generation to improve program
style and conciseness, continues to improve the ESaaS SPOC. 

Fox's other computer science research in the Berkeley ASPIRE project
focuses on highly productive parallel programming.  While at Stanford
he received teaching and mentoring awards from the Associated Students
of Stanford University, the Society of Women Engineers, and Tau Beta
Pi Engineering Honor Society. He is an alumnus of MIT (BS in EECS),
the University of Illinois (MS in EE), and UC Berkeley (PhD in CS).
He is a classically-trained musician and performer, an avid musical
theater fan and freelance Music Director, and bilingual/bicultural
(Cuban-American) New Yorker living in San Francisco. 

**_Recent praise from instructors using the ESaaS SPOC in their classrooms:_**

* "I have students beating down my door to get into the course." - Hank Walker, Texas A&M University

* "I love this course so much. It's such am amazing advancement to
Software Engineering education, and I've been so proud to offer it for
the past 2 years." - Kristen Justice, University of Colorado at
Colorado Springs

## RAD Lab/ParLab

Armando Fox (fox@cs.berkeley.edu) is a researcher in the the UC
Berkeley Parallel Computing Laboratory (Par Lab) and a co-founder of
the Berkeley RAD Lab (Reliable Adaptive Distributed Systems), where he
was a coauthor of the influential position paper "Above the Clouds: A
Berkeley View of Cloud Computing".  His 2003 collaboration with David
Patterson on Recovery-Oriented Computing earned him the distinction of
being included in the "Scientific American 50" top researchers and led
to the formation of the RAD Lab.  He is a Distinguished Member of the
Association for Computing Machinery and the recipient of an NSF CAREER
award and the Gilbreth Lectureship of the National Academy of
Engineering.  His industry experience includes helping to design the
Intel Pentium Pro microprocessor and founding a successful startup to
commercialize his UC Berkeley dissertation research on mobile
computing.  His research in the RAD Lab and Par Lab has influenced
design and practice at Google, Amazon, eBay, and other prominent IT
companies.

## RAD Lab/start of Agile course

Armando Fox (fox@cs.berkeley.edu) is an Adjunct Associate Professor at
UC Berkeley and a co-founder of the Berkeley RAD Lab (Reliable
Adaptive Distributed Systems) and AMP Lab (Algorithms, Machines and
People).  His 2003 collaboration with David Patterson on
Recovery-Oriented Computing earned him the distinction of being
included in the "Scientific American 50" top researchers and led to
the formation of the RAD Lab, where he was a coauthor of the
influential position paper "Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud
Computing".  This paper was one of the first widely-read academic
articles that outlined a cloud computing research agenda, and led to
several successful collaborations with top machine learning
researchers on the application of machine learning to operational
problems in cloud computing datacenters. 

In 2008, to support the RAD Lab's research agenda, Prof. Fox initiated
a new course to teach SaaS using Agile methods.  The success of that
pilot course led to the reinvention of the undergraduate Software
Engineering course and the new textbook "Engineering Long-Lasting
Software: An Agile Approach Using SaaS & Cloud Computing", co-authored
with renowned computer architect and Berkeley faculty colleague David
Patterson and informed by the research and industrial partnerships of
the RAD Lab. 

Prior to joining Berkeley, he was an Assistant Professor of Computer
Science at Stanford, where he received the National Science Foundation
CAREER Award, the Robert Noyce Family Faculty Fellowship, the IBM
Young Faculty Fellowship, and teaching awards from Stanford University
(his former employer), the Society of Women Engineers, and Tau Beta Pi
Engineering Honor Society.  In previous lives he helped design the
Intel Pentium Pro microprocessor and founded a small company to
commercialize his UC Berkeley dissertation research on mobile
computing.  He holds degrees in electrical engineering and computer
science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and UC Berkeley.  

## Cloud Computing

Armando Fox (fox@cs.berkeley.edu) is an Adjunct Associate Professor at
UC Berkeley and a co-founder of the Berkeley RAD Lab. Prior to that he
was an Assistant Professor of Computer Science at Stanford, and
received his PhD, MS and BS degrees at Berkeley, Illinois at MIT
respectively. His current research interests include applied
statistical machine learning and cloud computing; he is a co-author of
the recently released position paper "Above the Clouds: A Berkeley
View of Cloud Computing" and has frequently lectured on this topic.
He has published several papers in collaboration with top machine
learning researchers on the application of machine learning to
diagnosing, characterizing and identifying operational problems in
datacenter-scale and cloud computing installations.  His 2003
collaboration with David Patterson on Recovery-Oriented Computing
earned him the distinction of being included in the "Scientific
American 50" top researchers.  In previous lives he helped design the
Intel Pentium Pro microprocessor and founded a company to
commercialize his UC Berkeley dissertation research on mobile
computing.  
