---
title: "Armando's Summer Reading 2010"
categories: ["Book summary"]
---



I always look forward to this time of year, even though it's inevitably a sprint to get to it.  I'm preparing for our annual 2-week family vacation in Cancun (with some diving in Cozumel thrown in), the one vacation per year on which I don't bring my laptop. What I do bring is lots to read --- for me it's a deep garbage collection and intellectual replenishment.  It's not unusual for me to finish 8 to 12 books during the two weeks. So I invest a fair amount of time researching what to read and loading up my Kindle---since I bought it about 3 years ago, my policy is not to bring any paper books or documents on a leisure trip.

Here's what's on the Kindle for this trip:

**Nonfiction -- history**: I grew up in New York and have always been fascinated with its history.  So I'll be reading _97 Orchard_, about five families who occupied the tenement building at that address on New York's Lower East Side, which has since been turned into the _Tenement Museum_.  The book focuses on how immigrants who otherwise plunged into assimilating themselves into American culture retained their native cooking for comfort and identity, and includes authentic period recipes that might have been prepared by those families.  I'll also be reading _Twilight at the World of Tomorrow_, a dramatization of the people and events that led to (and through) the 1939 World's Fair in _Flushing Meadow Park_, which until then had been an ash dump, and  the juxtaposition of the culture and attempted optimism of the Fair against the gloom of the Depression and the uncertainy of the brewing Second World War (during the Fair's 18 months, several countries' pavilions closed down as those countries were occupied by the Nazis).

**More Nonfiction -- evolutionary psychology**: I have always enjoyed
evolutionary neuropsychology when written for the popular press in
books like _Music, The Brain & Ecstasy_ (and its lighterweight
cousin _This Is Your Brain on Music_ and the work of philosopher Dan
Dennett.  I recently finished (on the recommendation of a
colleague) _What Science Offers the Humanities_, a repudiation of the
current "standard social science model" prevalent in the humanities
according to which humans' mental development can only be discussed
and evaluated in terms of culture and nurture and not in any
biological terms, which are taken to be arbitrary and without
defensible basis.  The book makes a compelling argument against that
stance, and I'll be reading Steven Pinker's _The Blank Slate: The
Modern Denial of Human Nature_, which seems to take the argument
further.  In a similar but lighter spirit, I'll be reading _How We
Decide (recommended by my sister-in-law and others) and
maybe _Nudge  (the one about making better decisions, not the one
about God something-or-other). 

**More nonfiction -- American societal and cultural studies:** I'm
considering _The Collapse of Complex Societies_ (which seems from the
sample to be more tightly written than Jared Diamond's _Collapse: How
Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed_, which I found disappointingly
hard to follow after the incredibly well written *Guns, Germs &
Steel*), and _Bowling Alone_, a book about how community organizations
across America are dying (more specifically, their members are dying,
and new younger ones aren't signing up) and the resulting loss of
social capital---as someone who helps run a community theater that
relies heavily on volunteers, this seems relevant.  (Update: *Bowling
Alone* was written in 2001; evidently the same author, Robert Putnam,
came out with a book last year called *Better Together: Restoring the
American Community*.  We'll see if I like the original enough to read
the sequel.) 

**Fiction**:  I've been rereading (for about the 3rd time now) _Foucault's Pendulum_, the granddaddy of all conspiracy novels, which is to Dan Brown as the works of Tolkien are to the Harry Potter books.  If I don't finish my dog-eared paperback before leaving, I'll have to download it.

Besides the historico-conspiracy genre, which used to be reliably good until Dan Brown's success spawned a myriad of "me too" books, I've always liked hard SF, and recently discovered Charles Stross and Richard K. Morgan.  I'm not as enthusiastic about Stross's "Laundry Files" series as his previous work, but nonetheless I'll be giving _The Fuller Memorandum_ a whirl.  I also found a number of titles for under a dollar in the Kindle Store that sounded like they might at least be promising as hard SF, including David Derrico's _Right Ascension_ and various intriguing-sounding novellas by Christian Cantrell.  Hey, for under a dollar each, I'll give them a try!  Maybe the next Isaac Asimov, Connie Willis or Arthur C. Clarke will get her/his start this way... Also in the "try it for under a buck" category, I'm also checking out _Ancient Awakening_ by Matthew Bryan Laube, who's been compared to H.P. Lovecraft in reader reviews.

**Geek Fiction**: _Fatal System Error: The Hunt for the New Crime
Lords Who Are Bringing Down the Internet_ is a based-on-true-stories
account of the underground economy around denial-of-service and
similar attacks, the latest frontier for organized crime.  The
beginning grabbed me, so I'll be reading that.  I got that
recommendation from the Bookworm column in _;login_, the monthly
magazine of the USENIX
Association,
which also recommended  _The Myths of Security_, which seemed really
half-baked based on the intro and largely a marketing piece for
McAfee. 

**Nonfiction**: I have a strong interest in medieval history, and a
somewhat weaker interest in classical history, so I'm checking out
Susan Wise Bauer's _History of the Medieval World_ and _History of the
Ancient World_.  I haven't committed to buying them yet, but based on
the samples, they are dense, no-nonsense "here's what happened"
narratives --- perhaps not of huge interest to an historian who knows
the periods well, but maybe suitable for a nonexpert like me who needs
a good big-picture overview to contextualize the more detailed works,
like Jean de Joinville's first-person commentary _Chronicles of the
Crusades_, which has been in the public domain for hundreds of years
and is also going with me. 

Speaking of the public domain, I'm also bringing William Lewis Manly's
classic travel journal _Death Valley in '49_ (I'm almost through my
second rereading), the complete works of Mark Twain (I like to jump
around), and probably the complete works of Shakespeare. 

It's a lot of fun to load up for a trip like this. Those of you family
members who have Kindle devices registered to my account...maybe
you'll enjoy the above, in addition to the 60 or so books I've already
purchased. 

See you in Cancun!

