---
title: "Minitel: Welcome to the Internet"
categories: ["Book summary"]
---

## Minitel: Welcome To the Internet

In the 1980s, when a "consumer-facing Internet" was still
over a decade away, France's Minitel system introduced French
citizens to much of what they'd be doing on the Internet years later.
Despite being centrally planned, its architectural combination of central control
and some distributed/market-incentive features resulted in a lot of
innovation and serve to test the hypothesis that only a
fully-decentralized free-market Internet could have succeeded.

A central theme of the work is that unlike other implementations of
[videotex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Videotex) (e.g. the British) where content production
and distribution were integrated in a proprietary system, Minitel
controlled the client and network architecture but content
distribution (e.g. apps) was separate, enabling a combination of free
market and centralized control, not unlike the iPhone's App Store
thirty years later.

France Telecom distributed free Minitel terminals to anyone who wanted
them; they were essentially smart terminals with 80x24 grayscale
monitors that could also display over 300 Latin-1 glyphs as well as
low-res graphics by using "semi-graphic" character glyphs (in
practice, these were realized on a 2-column by 3-row grid per glyph),
PSTN direct-connect modems (by default, 1200 baud down and 75 baud up,
but this could be changes in software), and a chiclet keyboard.
An optional smartcard reader could let the terminal function as a POS
system (at a time when US retailers still used paper credit-card
imprint slips) or run software from a smartcard.  Clever hackers
figured out how to use the terminal's modem with PCs to create
one-off BBS networks, but the mass market more or less used the device
as shipped.

While clients were universal, servers were not.  France's X.25
"Transpac" packet network required providers to purchase X.25 modems
and use computers that could run the protocol stack.  Regional
exchanges connected PSTN modem banks to Transpac and also hosted
several "baseline" apps such as a user-facing directory service, a
database of known Teletel services, and the routing of "short codes" 
(4-digit codes that Minitel users typed in to connect to a specific
service; these were often on billboard and magazine ads) to the
correct app in some faraway ops center.

Depending on the app, the server computers could run videotex servers
or text-menu-based apps that just used the terminal's text mode.
(Indeed, Minitel is pretty much the only widely-used deployment of
videotex.)  Any charges for using apps appeared on the user's phone
bill, with France Telecom getting a piece of the revenue.

## Sociology and technology

